[Music]
well lookie here you're about to figure
out what
lies under the surface of each planet in
the solar system
get into your spaceship equipped with
the largest drill you can only imagine
and off you go you start with mercury
it's the closest planet to the sun at
first sight
the place looks similar to our good old
moon but
after landing you understand it's an
illusion
all around your spaceship there are
craters left by meteorites
the planet's surface is littered with
huge steep hills
some of them are two miles high and
stretch for hundreds of miles
you start drilling and immediately
understand it's going to be tough
mercury is the second densest planet in
the solar system
topped only by earth the planet's outer
shell is 250 miles of solid crust and
rocky mantle
after getting through it you see
mercury's metallic core
it takes up almost 85 percent of the
planet's volume
and contains more iron than any other
planet we know about
you don't need to drill anymore the
outer core is liquid
but once you reach the solid inner core
you have to switch that drill on again
the next planet you're going to explore
is venus it's the hottest planet in the
solar system
the average temperatures there are high
enough to melt lead
the pressure on the planet is 90 times
greater than that on earth
your spacecraft is traveling through
thick clouds of sulfuric acid
venus surface is reddish brown and
extremely dry
you land in the middle of a flat smooth
plane
planes like this cover two thirds of the
planet's surface
well you get down to work the drill
starts moving through the crust
it consists mostly of basalt and is
almost 12 miles wide
the next layer is a molten rocky mantle
after some time
you get the feeling it'll never end no
wonder
it's 1200 miles thick finally you arrive
at the planet's metallic iron core
it's huge twice wider than the mantle
see that blue sphere slightly to the
left it's earth
how about you skip it for the moment and
get back to it later
right now mars sounds so much more
exciting
the place is freezing cold the
temperature is minus
80 degrees fahrenheit the planet looks
reddish
and as soon as you make your first step
on its surface it becomes clear
why the ground is covered with rusty
colored dust
its fine particles are also floating in
the air around you
in most places that dust layer is seven
feet thick
you start drilling through the planet's
thin crust it's made up of volcanic
basalt rock
pretty soon you reach the mantle it's
composed of oxygen silicates and
other minerals something like a soft
rocky toothpaste
the red planet's mantel is much thinner
than earth's it's 1100 miles
thick at most you feel that the drill
begins to move a bit differently
ah must be the core it's made mostly of
iron
nickel and sulfur and is between 900 and
1200 miles across
and unlike earth's core it doesn't move
time to visit the largest planet of the
solar system
jupiter almost 1300 earths could fit
into this huge thing
it's also alarmingly hot about 43
000 degrees at the core but you can't
land on jupiter
because it doesn't have any solid
surface the planet is a gas
giant the key word here being gas your
drill is also of no use
at least at first while descending you
watch
thick brown yellow red and white clouds
passing by
thanks to them the planet looks colorful
and beautifully striped
you keep going deeper toward the center
of the planet
its atmosphere is made up of hydrogen
and helium gas
soon you see the hydrogen become liquid
under immense atmospheric pressure
and closer to the core this liquid turns
into a mixture of metallic hydrogen and
helium
you reach something that looks like a
core but even with the help of your
equipment
you can't figure out whether it's a
molten ball of liquid
or a solid rock 14 to 18 times the mass
of earth
maybe one day astronomers will help you
answer this question
the next planet turns out to be
exceptionally windy like me
the winds on saturn travel at more than
1100 miles per hour at the equator
from above it looks as if the gas giant
has a solid yellowish brown
surface you get through several
different layers of clouds
and suddenly you realize you can't land
your spacecraft here as well
saturn is the least dense planet in the
solar system
it has only 1 8 the average earth's
density
if you found a pool of water large
enough to fit the ringed planet
the gas giant would flow if you kept
going down
you'd probably have found saturn's core
it's likely to be rocky
with hydrogen and helium surrounding it
ah you're approaching the ice giant
uranus
which means there's going to be some
surface to land on
or not the planet isn't solid you fly
through the upper atmosphere
and sink into the liquid icy center the
ice
which makes up 80 percent of the
planet's mass is actually
a hot dense fluid it consists of water
ammonia ice and methane this part of the
planet is sometimes called
a water ammonia ocean this ice surrounds
a solid rocky core
that's where you can finally use your
drill the course small
half the earth's mass compared to other
planets it's also
rather cool a mere 9 000 degrees
you're reaching the farthest point of
your journey neptune
it's four times the size of earth but 17
times as heavy
the bluish surface you see when coming
closer is a layer of permanent clouds
and swirling gas
below this surface there's a large
mantle liquid and red hot
the mantle is rich in methane ammonia
and water
and equals 15 earth's masses
at last you have something to drill the
planet's core
is solid it consists mostly of iron and
other metals keep drilling
until you're at a depth of 4500 miles
astronomers are almost sure that's where
you'll find a diamond layer
that's right it rains diamond crystals
there
well time to go back home people have
drilled pretty deep holes here
but they were never deep enough to even
get through the crust
after the drills traveled one third of
the way the temperature reached 360
degrees
and the equipment couldn't operate any
longer
but your drill is much stronger than
that that's why you easily move through
the crust
it takes up only one percent of earth's
volume and is broken into tectonic
plates
they let heat escape from the earth's
interior you reach the mantle
this layer is about 1800 miles thick and
makes nearly 84 percent of the planet's
volume
it consists of silicate rocks rich in
iron and magnesium
well you don't need to drill anymore the
1500 mile thick outer core
is liquid it consists of iron and nickel
but the pressure isn't high enough for
it to be solid
you pass through the boundary between
the outer and inner core
it's quite a challenge the temperature
there is 10
800 degrees as hot as on the sun's
surface
and the pressure is 3.3 million times
the atmospheric pressure at sea level
the inner core is a solid ball made of
iron and nickel
its radius is 760 miles it makes 20
of the earth's radius and 80 of the
moons
scientists know what's going on under
the crust of the planets that are
millions and billions of miles away from
us
and they don't even need to go there
drill through their surface and peek
inside
they combine information about the
planet's density magnetic field
mountain ranges heat and seismic
activity to make their smart assumptions
for example earth's magnetic field
shields us
and the atmosphere from solar flares and
solar winds
scientists believe that it exists thanks
to a hot iron core
inside the planet it rotates and
generates invisible protection
like an enormous scorching hot dynamo
and this magnetic field is way stronger
than that on mars
it probably means that something
happened to the red planet's core
maybe it cooled down and kind of
switched off
or maybe there wasn't any magnetic field
to begin with
there are loads of active volcanoes on
earth's surface
that's how scientists can conclude there
must be a relatively thin
crust and the mantle must be made of
liquid magma
but martian volcanoes aren't active
anymore
there could have been a hot liquid
mantle under the planet's crust once
but after the volcanoes formed something
went wrong
the interior probably cooled down or the
crust
somehow became thicker whatever it was
it successfully stopped magma from
getting to the surface
and then there's also seismic activity
if many earth or
mars or venus quakes happen on the
planet
there's a lot going on under the surface
if we talk about earth
it's the movements of tectonic plates
most earthquakes
happen along their edges if there's
little seismic activity on the planet
it might have no plate tectonics then
its interior is calm
researchers also pay attention to how
long it takes a seismic wave
to go through a planet or how it echoes
inside
it can help to get more information
about the density of the crust
what the mantle's made of and so on but
scientists have to be extremely careful
with the causes of these earthquakes
sometimes they can occur after
meteorites hit the planet
and it has no connection with the
processes going on
under the surface of course these last
two methods will only work with rock
planets
mainly because gas giants have neither
volcanoes nor seismic activity
boy all this talk about thin crust and
thick crust
is making me hungry hey you up for some
pizza